[Music]
hey guys what do you say we play a round
of the word association game and here's
a word for you and Arctica the first
thing that comes to my mind are glaciers
ice frost snow uninhabitable desert well
you get it but how about a lake of
bubbling lava hidden deep under the ice
an unusual connection right but that's
actually a very real and highly unusual
and Arctic phenomenon that was just
recently discovered I used to imagine
volcanoes as huge bowls filled to the
brim with bright orange molten lava but
it turns out that in the real world
volcanoes are far from this image what
I'm describing is called a lava lake and
until recently people only knew about
seven such lakes bubbling in different
regions of our planet but here we go now
in july 2019 scientists discovered one
more
viii lake of lava and not just anywhere
but in antarctica well to tell you the
truth this finding wasn't such a big
surprise for researchers scientists from
the University College London and the
British Antarctic Survey guess that it
existed more than 30 years ago and since
then they've been trying to find this
leg already in the 1990s scientists
noted some weird thermal anomalies
occurring around the crater of the
volcano unfortunately at that time the
resolution of the photos was too bad to
prove the existence of the lava lake but
with the development of technology
satellites started to make more powerful
and precise images and after the
researchers studied the images made by
Landsat Sentinel 2 and aster satellites
they made sure their theory was correct
and Arctic as lava lake is resting in
the crater of the active volcano mount
michel located on small remote saunders
island in the South Atlantic Ocean and
the thing is both breathtaking and
terrify even though it's not the largest
lava lake in the world
it's
very impressive with a diameter varying
from 300 to 700 feet and the lava lake
is hot really hot at times it's
temperature can reach a staggering two
thousand three hundred thirty degrees
Fahrenheit and that's hot enough to melt
almost any substance on earth even iron
one of the main reasons why the lava
lake was only recently discovered is its
remote location
Saunders Island is one of the self
sandwhich volcanic change to reach this
place you need to make a long and tiring
journey full of dangers and hardships
through the icy waters of the South
Atlantic sorry I got a bit carried away
you can actually just sign up for an
ocean cruise but it'll cost you more
than ten thousand bucks
hmmm that might be the reason why so few
researchers had gone to see Saunders
Island before the discovery on top of
that even though some of them did visit
the place they only made it to the
bottom no one had ever climbed to the
top of the mountain anyway it would have
taken scientists much longer to confirm
their lava lake suspicions but for the
high-resolution satellite images before
that they only knew that a temperature
anomaly on Saunders Island did exist but
then some images appear taken in the
wavelengths of light necessary to spot
any geothermal activity and voila in
these photos you can clearly see a lake
of bubbling lava inside the crater on
the other hand the researchers still
don't know how deep this lake is so
what's so unusual about Mount Michaels
lava lake the thing is that hundreds of
volcanoes erupt by spitting out lava
which then gathers into small lakes and
pools of molten rock but then within
several weeks or even days these lava
reservoirs dry into hard solid rock as
for our Antarctic lava lake it remains
liquid no matter what and considering
there are only seven other persistent
molten lava lakes in the world
this phenomenon used to puzzle
geologists to no end I mean why does the
lava in more than 15
active volcanoes on the planet turn into
rock so soon after eruptions but stay
liquid in these eight other locations it
turns out that it's the result of
volcanic gas activity yes I can relate
to the gas activity sulfur dioxide steam
and carbon dioxide keep temperatures
inside crater so high that the lava
consistently stays in its liquid state
no wonder scientists were happy to find
another anomaly of this kind they say
that thanks to this discovery they'll be
able to understand the volcanic activity
better also now they'll know what
potential danger saunders island may
present and finally the exploration of
the lake of lava in the remote mountain
michel volcano help the researchers
develop specific techniques that allow
monitoring volcanoes from space what's
going to be the next step in mount
michaels lava lake research according to
scientists it might be an airplane or a
drone flying over the crater of the
volcano and taking pictures of the lava
lake unfortunately it's apparently
really hard to organize and the
preparation process can take years and
now how about I tell you about the other
seven persistent lava lakes scattered
all over the planet they are al and
Ethiopia Mount Erebus
in Antarctica Ambrym volcano in Vanuatu
Massiah in Nicaragua Kilauea in Hawaii
Mount Yasir in Vanuatu and the largest
discovered lava lake in the crater of
mount Nyiragongo in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and this last one is
worth a separate story first of all
since 1882 the mountain a year ago
volcano has erupted a whopping 34 times
what's more some of these eruptions in
the form of a bubbling lava lake lasted
for years the lava lake itself is
normally about eight hundred twenty feet
in diameter and its depth can reach a
mind-blowing to a thousand feet if you
ever decide to visit this unique place
prepare yourself for a tough trek to a
height of more than eleven thousand four
hundred feet now on top of that you'll
need to be extra cautious with this
treacherous ball
and the lava lake it contains it emits
extremely toxic carbon dioxide gas that
seeps right up from the ground if this
gas doesn't get blown away by the wind
its effect on people can be deadly On
January 10th 1977 a catastrophe struck
the villages that surrounded mountain a
year ago the walls of the crater cracked
and broke and the lava lake drained its
contents down the slopes of the volcano
in an hour or so the speed of the molten
lava flow reached 60 miles per hour
unfortunately many inhabitants of the
nearby settlements simply didn't have
time to escape the approaching red hot
stream and didn't survive this natural
disaster and since we're talking about
the most unusual lava lakes I can't help
but mention the one in the crater of
Mount Erebus the most active volcano in
Antarctica when the lake was found its
exact location was the most puzzling
thing for the researchers imagine solid
ice biting frost and liquid lava with
steamy gas clouding over it at that time
it was an unprecedented discovery Mount
Erebus is situated in the coldest place
on earth and still hosts a lava lake
with a habit of launching lava bombs
which are flying globs of molten rock
the volcano woke up in the 1970s and
since then scientists have been
continuously monitoring it with the help
of infrared cameras and earthquake
monitors perched on the slopes and on
top of the mountain it helped the
researchers observe an exciting
phenomenon like a sleeping dragon lava
inside the crater churns and Huff's as
if the volcano is breathing
interestingly Mount Erebus follows its
own pattern the volume of its gas plumes
falls and rises every 5 to 18 minutes
simultaneously the surface of the
bubbling lava lake moves as well rising
and falling from 6 to 8 feet during each
cycle
besides the lava on the surface of the
lake keeps cooling and cracking well new
boiling lava
up from the bottom spreading up through
the cracks and this is a sight to behold
as for Kilauea in Hawaii it's one of the
world's most active volcanoes and it
used to host not just one but two lava
lakes one of them was sitting an event
inside the summit crater while the other
filled an Eastside convent and both of
these lakes remain molten and active
until they just disappeared in 2018
the reason was unusual activity on the
volcano's East Side but the researchers
of the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory are
sure that one day at least the bigger
lava lake in the summit will return the
number of lava lakes in the crater of
active volcano berta al in ethiopia
varies with one persistent lake lying in
the crater and the other appearing there
from time to time and occasionally lava
overflows down the slope of the mountain
in bright orange rivulet s-- wasn't that
a hot topic I thought so now would you
set off on a journey to Antarctica to
see a lava lake with your own eyes let
me know down in the comments if you
learned something new today then give
this video a like and share with a
friend but hey don't go spilling your
lava just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life